
Though for no other reason, yet for this, I am writing this so that posterity
may know we have not loosely through silence permitted things to pass as in a
dream, that there shall be extant information about the current state of the
Church of England and people's endeavor to uphold it.

At your hands, our beloved brethrens in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
(for in him we bear the love to all that seem to be born of him, and this love
would not be drown by the sea of your gall and bitterness),
I have no great cause to expect anything less than the same asperity 
which you give to people who do not concur in opinion with you.


I have to admit that before I examined your sundry declarations on that behalf
(i.e. God's Discipline), I cannot help  but think that since so many right well
affected and most religious minds showed great earnestness to their cause,
they must have something important to say. 


===============================================================
2017-4-24

To Those Who Seek to Reform the Ecclesiastical Laws and Orders in the Church of
England

Though for no other cause, yet for this; I am writing this so that posterity may
know we have not loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a
dream, that there shall be extant information concerning the present state of
the Church of England and people's endeavor to uphold it.

[Q: Why H. invokes posterity instead of addressing Purians directly?]

At your hands, our beloved brethrens in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (for in
him we bear the love unto all that seem to be born of him, this love which shall
never be drown by your gall and bitterness), I expect nothing but the usual
asperity which you lay on people who do not concur in opionion with you.

But our hope is, the the God of peace shall (amid man's nature of being
impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us to quietly and even gladly to
suffer all this, for the sake of the work we covet to perform.

The wonderful zeal and fervor which you have withstood the received orders of
this Church, was the first thing which caused me to consider, whether (as all
your published books and writings peremptorily maintain) every Christian,
fearing God, is bound to join with you for the furtherance of what you call the
"Lord's Discipline". 

I have to admit, before I examined your sundry declarations on that behalf, I
could not help thinking that there must be some marvelous reasons for so many 
otherwise well affected and religious people to behavior so earnestly that way.



===============================================================
2017-7-4  Paraphrase of Hooker, Preface I.1

To Those Who Seek to Reform the Ecclesiastical Laws and Orders in the Church of
England

Though for no other cause, yet for this; that posterity may know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, that there
shall be extant information about people who care so much about the
present state of the the Church of England, and their careful endeavor which
would have upheld it.

At your hands, our beloved brethrens by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (for
in him we bear the love unto all that would but seem to be born of him, which
the sea of your gall and bitterness shall never drown,) I have no great cause to
expect anything other than your usual portion and lot, which you have lay on
those whom do not concur in opionion and sentence with you.

But our hope is, that the God of peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature too
impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us to suffer all things quietly
and even gladly, for the sake of that work we covet to perform.


===============================================================
2017-7-4  Paraphrase of Hooker, Preface I.2

The wonderful zeal and fervor with which you have withstood the received order
of this Church, was the first thing which caused me to enter into consideration,
whether (as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain) every
God-fearing Christian stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of that
which you term the Lord's Discipline.

[Q: Is "stand bound" in subjunctive mood?]


===============================================================
Burke, Present State of the Nation, re-typed

Party divisions, whether on the whole operating for good or evil, are things
inseparable from free government. This is a truth, I believe, admit little
disputes, having been established by the uniform experience of all ages. The
part a good citizen ought to take in these divisions has been a matter of much
deeper controversy. But God forbid that any controversy relating to our
essential morals should admit of no decision. It appears to me, that this
question, like most of the others which regard our duties in life, is to be
determined by our station in it. Private men may be wholly neutral, and entirely
innocent: but they who are legally invested with public trust, or stand on the
high ground of rank and dignity, which is trust implied, can hardly in any case
remain indifferent, without the certainty of sinking into insignificance; and
thereby in effect deserting that post in which, with the fullest authority, and
for the wisest purposes, the laws and institutions of their country have fixed
them. However, if it be the office of those who are thus circumscribed, to take
a decied part, it is no less their duty that it should be a sorber one. It ought
to be circumscribed by the same laws of decorum, and balanced by the same
temper, which bound and regulate all the virtures. In a word, we ought to act in
party with all the moderation which does not absolutely enervate that vigor, and
quench that fervency of spirity, without which the best wishes for the public
good must evaporate in empty speculation.

It is probably from some such motives that the friends of a very respectable
party in this kingdom have been hitherto silent. For these two years past, from
one and the same quarter of politics, a continual fire has been kept upon them;
sometimes from the unwieldly column of quartos and octavos; sometimes from the
light squadrons of occasional pamphlets and flying sheets. Every month has
brought on its periodical calumny. The abuse has take every shape which the
ability of the writers could give it; plain invective, clumsy raillery,
misrepresented anecdote. No method of vilifying the measures, the abilities, the
intentions, or the persons which compose that body, has been omitted.

On their part nothing was opposed but patience and character. It was a matter of
the most serious and indignant affliction to persons who thought themselves in
conscience bound to oppose a ministery dangerous from its very constitution, as
well as its measures, to find themselves, whenever they faced their adversaries,
continually attacked on the rear by a set of men who pretended to be actuated by
motives similar to theirs. They saw that the plan long pursued, with but too
fatal a success, was to break the strength of this kingdom, by frittering down
the bodies which compose it, by fomenting bitter and sanguinary animosities, and
by dissolving every tie of social affection and public trust. These virtuous
men, such I am warranted by public opinion to call them, were resolved rather to
endure everything, than co-operate in that design. A diversity of opionion upon
almost every principle of politics had indeed drawn a string line of separation
between them and some others. However, they were desirous not to extend the
misfortune by unnecessary bitterness; they wished to prevent a difference of
opinion on the commonwealth from festering into rancorous and incurable
hostility. Accordingly they endeavored that all past controversies should be
forgotten; and that enough for the day should be the evil thereof. There is
however a limit at which forbearance ceases to be a virtue. Mena may tolerate
injuries whilst they are only personal to themselves. But it is not the first of
virtues to bear with moderation the indignities that are offered to our country.
A piece has at lenght appeared, from the quarter of all the former attacks,
which upon every public consideration demands an answer. Whilst persons more
equal to this buisiness may be engaged in affairs of greater moment, I hope I
shall be excused, if, in a few hours of a time not very important, and from such
materials as I have by me (more than enough however for this purpose), I
undertake to set the facts and arguments of this wonderful performance in a
proper light. I will endeavor to state what this piece is; the purpose for which
I take it to have been written; and the effects (supposing it should have any
effect at all) it must necessarily produce.

This piece is called "The Present State of the Nation". It may be considered as
a sort of digest of the avowed maxims of a certain political school, the effects
of whose doctrines and practices this country will fuel long and severely. It is
made up of a farrago of almost every topic which has been agitated on national
affairs in parliamentary debate, or provate conversation, for these last seven
years. The oldest controversies are hauled out of the dust with which time and
neglect had covered them. Arguments ten times repeated, a thousand times
answered before, are here repeated again. Public accounts formerly printed and
reprinted revolve once more, and find their old station in this sober meridian.
All the commonplace lamentations upon the decay of trade, the increase of taxes,
and the high price of labor and provisions, are here retailed again and again in
the same tone with which they have drawled through columns of Gazetteers and
Advertisers for a century together. Paradoxes which affront common sense, and
uninsteresting barren truths which generate no conclusion, are thrown in to
augment unwieldy bulk, without adding anything to weight. Because two
accusations are better than one, contradictions are set staring one another in
the face, without even an attempt to reconcile them. And, to give the whole a
sort of portentuous air of labor and information, the table of the House of
Commons is swept into this grand reservoir of politics.

......

Such is the author's scheme. Whether it will answer his purpose I know not. But
surely that purpose ought to be a wonderfully good one, to warrant the methods
he has taken to compass it. If the facts and reasonings in this piece are
admitted, it is all over with us. The continuance of our tranquillity depends on
the compassion of our rivals. Unable to secure to ourselves the advantanges of
peace, we are at the same time utterly unfit for war. It is impossible, if the
state of things be credited abroad, that we can have any alliance; all nations
will fly from so dangerous a connection, lest, instead of partakers of our
strength, they should only become sharers in our ruin. If it is believed at
home, all that firmness of mind, and dignified national courage, which used to
be the great support of this isle against the powers of the world, must melt
away, and fail within us.

In such a state of things can it be amiss if I aim at holding out some comfort
to the nation; another sort of comfort, indeed, than that which this writer
provides for it; a comfort not from its physician, but from its constitution: if
I attempt to show that all the arguments upon which he founds the decay of that
constitution, and the necessity of that physician, are vain and frivolous?
I will follow the author closely in his own long career, through the war, the
peace, the finances, our trade, and our foreign politics: not for the sake of
the particular measures which he discusses; that can be of no use; they are all
decided; their good is all enjoyed, or their evil incurred: but for the sake of
the principles of war, peace, trade, and finances.  These principles are of
infinite moment. They must come again and again under consideration; and it
imports the public, of all things, that those of its ministers be enlarged, and
just, and well confirmed, upon all these subjects. What notions this author
entertains we shall see presently; notions in my opinion very irrational, and
extremely dangerous; and which, if they should crawl from pamphlets into
counsels, and be realized from private speculation into national measures,
cannot fail of hastening and completing our ruin.

This author, after having paid his compliment to the showy appearances of the
late war in our favor, is in the utmost haste to tell you that these appearances
were fallacious, that they were no more than an imposition. -- I fear I must
trouble the reader with a pretty long quotation, in order to set before him the
more clearly this author's peculiar way of conceiving and reasoning:

......

If any one be willing to see to how much greater lengths the author carries
these ideas, he will recur to the book. This is sufficient for a speciment of
his manner of thinking. I believe one reflection uniformly obtrudes itself upon
every reader of these paragraphs. For what purpose, in any cause, shall we
hereafter contend with France? Can we ever flatter ourselves that we shall wage
a more successful war? If, on our part, in a war the most prosperous we ever
carried on, by sea and by land, and in every part of the globe, attended with
the unparalleled circumstance of an immense increase of trade and augmentation
of revenue; if a continued series of disappointments, disgraces, and defeats,
followed by public bankruptcy, on the part of France; if all these still leave
her a gainer on the whole balance, will it not be downright frenzy in us ever to
look her in the face again, or to contend with her any, even the most essential
points, since victory and defeat, though by different ways, equally conduct us
to be more for our advantage. According to his representation of things, the
question is only concerning the most easy fall. France had not discovered, our
statesman tells us, at the end of that war, the triumphs of defeat, and the
resources which are derived from bankruptcy. For my poor part, I do not wonder
at their blindness. But the English ministers saw further. Our author has at
length let foreigners also into the secret, and made them altogether as wise as
ourselves. It is their own fault if (vulgato imperii arcano) they are imposed
upon any longer. They now are apprised of the sentiments which the great
candidate for the government of this great empire entertains; and they will act
accordingly. They are taught our weakness and their own advantages.


=============================================================
>>> Precis of Johnson's Rambler, No. 1

The difficulty of writing the first address is felt by many writers and a new 
method for writing it is strongly desired.

Most authors wish that they have already established the first address long ago
to avoid the dangers produced from the desire of pleasing the audience.

Many epic writers mimicked the opening of Homer.

But this mimicking has not extened to inferior literature.

It is wise to follow Horace's advice to be modest about one's own writing.

But there are still many writers who believe too much on their own writings.

It may be as dangerous to claim too little for one's writing.

It is acceptable for an author entering the world to praise himself.

Similar to the case in love, a new author will be better off if he keeps a low
profile before gaining the favor of the public.

It is understandable for new authors to do certain things to attract favors.

Diurnal writers have the advantage that the quality of their writing 
can be easily distinguished.

This is one of the many reasons I propose to present one short essay every 
Tuesday and Saturday to the public.

There are many conveniencies to this method of publication, one of the most
important being its flexibility to follow current event and taste.

The other advantage of this method is that due to its short length the author is
more likely to find enough things to say, and he can change direction or give up
the project if it does not work out.


=============================================================
>>> Precis of Johnson's Rambler, No. 2

The inclination of looking into the future has been written about and ridiculed
by many authors.

Censure on futurity is indulged because it implies superiority.

===============================================================
Hooker, Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, Preface I

Though for no other cause, yet for this, that posterity may know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, that there
shall be men's information extant thus much concerning the present state of the
Church of God [established] amongst us, and their [careful]
endeavours[endeavour] that[which] might[would] have upheld the same.

At your hands, beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ (on which we bear
the love at anything that was born out of him, and it is not your gall and 
bitterness that shall ever drown,)
I do not expect anything other than the selfsame lot and portion, 
... who do not concur with you.
[This is hard!]

Though for no other cause, yet for this; that posterity may know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, there shall
be men's information extant thus much concerning the present state of the Church
of God established amongst us, and their careful endeavour that would have
upheld the same. 
At your hands, beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
(for in him the love which we bear unto all that would but seem to be born of
him, it is not the sea of your gall and bitterness that shall ever drown,) I
have no great cause to look for other than the self-same portion and lot, that
your manner hath been hitherto to lay on them that concur not in opionion and
sentence with you.
But our hope is that the God of peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature too
impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us quietly and even gladly to
suffer all things for that work sake that[which] we covet to perform.

Though for no other cause, yet for this, that posterity may know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, there shall
be [for] men's information extant thus much concerning the present state of the Church
of God established amongst us, and their careful endeavour which would have
upheld the same. 
At your hands, beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
(for in him the love which we bear unto all that would but seem to be born of
him, it is not the sea of your gall and bitterness which[that] shall ever drown,) 
I have no great cause to look for other than the self-same portion and
lot, which your manner hath been hitherto to lay upon[on] them that concur not in
opinion and sentence with you.
But our hope is, the God of peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature too
impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us quietly and even gladly to
suffer all things, for that work sake which we covet to perform.
The wonderful zeal and fervour wherewith ye have withstood the received orders
of this church, was the first thing which caused me to enter into consideration,
whether [(as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain)]
every Christian man, fearing God, stand bound to join with you for the
furtherance of what[that which] ye term the Lord's Discipline.

Copy:
Wherein I must plainly confess unto you, that before I examined your sundry
declarations in that behalf, it could not settle in my head to think, but that
such numbers of otherwise right well-affected and most religiously inclined
minds had some marvellous reasonable inducements which led them with so great
earnestness that way.


===============   2017-12-18  ================================
Transcribe from memory:

Though for no other cause, yet for this, that posterity may know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, there shall
be for men's information extant thus much concerning the present state of the
Church of God established amongst us, and their careful endeavour which would
have upheld the same.

At your hands, beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, (for in him the love
which we bear unto all which but seem to be born of him, and it is not the sea
of your gall and bitterness that shall ever drown,) I have no great cause to
look for other than the selfsame portion and lot, which your manner hath been
hitherto to lay on them that concur not in opinion and sentence with you.

But our hope is, that the God of peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature too
impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us quietly and even gladly to
suffer all things, for that work sake which we covet to perform.

The wonderful zeal and fervour which ye have withstood the received orders of
this church, was the first thing which caused me to enter into consideration,
whether (as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain) every
Christian man, fearing God, stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of
that which ye term the Lord's Discipline.

Wherein I must plainly confess unto you, that before I examined your sundry
declarations in that behalf, it could not settle in my head to think, but that
undoubtedly such numbers of otherwise right well affected and most religiously
inclined minds had some marvellous reasonable inducements which led them with so
great earnestness that way.

But when once, as near as my slender ability would serve, I had with travail and
care performed that part of the Apostle's advice and counsel in such cases,
whereby he willeth to "try all things", and was come at the length so far, that
there remained only the other clause to be satisfied, wherein he concludeth that
"What good is must be held"; there was in my poor understanding no remedy, but
to set down this as my final resolute persuation: "Surely the present form of
church-government which the laws of this land have established, is such, that
no law of God, nor the reason of man hath hitherto been alleged of force
sufficient to prove that they do ill, 


2017-12-20
Though for no other cause, yet for this, that posterity may know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, there shall
be for men's information extant thus much concerning the present state of the
Church of God established amongst us, and their careful endeavour which would
have upheld the same.

At your hands, beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, (for in him the
love which we bear unto all that but seem to be born of him, it is not the sea
of gall and bitterness that shall ever drown,) I have no great cause to look for
other than the same portion and lot which your manner hath been hitherto to lay
on them that concur not in opinion and sentence with you. 

But our hope is, that the God of peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature too
impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us quietly and even gladly to
suffer all thing, for that work sake which we covet to perform.

The wonderful zeal and fervour which ye have withstood the received orders of
this church, was the first thing which caused me to enter into consideration,
whether (as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain) every
Christian man, fearing God, stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of
that which ye term the Lord's Discipline.

Wherein I must plainly confess unto you, that before I examined your sundry
declarations in that behalf, it could not settle in my head to think, but that
undoubtedly such numbers of otherwise right well affected and most religiously
inclined minds had some marvellous reasonable inducements which led them with so
great earnestness that way.

But when once, as near as my slender ability would serve, I had with travail and
care performed that part of the Apostle's advice and counsel in such cases,
whereby he willeth to "try all things", and was come at the length so far, that
there remained only the other clause to be satisfied, wherein he concludeth
"what good is must be held;" there is in my poor understanding no remedy, but to
set down this as my final resolute persuasion: Surely the present form of
church-government, which the laws of this land have established, is such, as no
law of God, nor reason of man hath hitherto been alleged of force sufficient to
prove they do ill, who to the uttermost of their power whithstand the
alteration thereof. Contrariwise, the other, which instead of it we are required
to accept, is only by error and misconceit named the ordinance of Jesus Christ,
no one proof as yet brought forth, whereby it may clearly appear to be so in the
very deed.

=========================================================
2018-01-04

It was the manner of those times (whether through men's desire to enjoy alone
the glory of their own enterprises, or else because the quickness of their
occasions required present dispatch, so it was,) that every particular church
did that within itself, which some few of their own thought good, by whom the
rest were all directed. Such number of churches then being, though free within
itself, yet small, common conferences beforehand might have eased them of much
after trouble. But a greater inconvenience it bred, that every after endeavoured
to be certain degrees more removed from conformity with the Church of Rome, than
the rest before had been. Which, notwithstanding, might have easily been
prevented, if the orders, which every church did think fit and convenient 
for itself, had not so peremptorily been established under that high commanding
form, which tendered them unto the people, as things everlastingly required by
the law of that Lord of lords, against whose statutes there is no exception to
be taken. For by this mean it came to pass, that one church could not but blame
and condemn another of disobedience to the will of Christ, in those things where
manifest difference was between them: whereas the selfsame orders allowed, but
yet established in more wary and suspense manner, as being to stand in force
till God would give the opportunity of some general conference what might be the
best for each of them afterwards to do. This I say had both prevented all
occasion of just dislike which others might take, and reserved a greated liberty
unto the authors themselves of entering into farther consulation afterwards.


=======================================================================
2018-1-8

Though for no other cause, yet for this, that posterity might know we have not
loosely through silence permitted things to pass away as in a dream, there shall
be for men's information extant thus much concerning the present state of the
Church of God established amongst us, and their careful endeavour which might
have upheld the same. At your hands, beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, (for in him the love which we bear unto all that would but seem to be
born of him, it is not the sea of your gall and bitterness that shall ever
drown,) I have no great cause to look for other than the selfsame portion and
lot, which your manner hath been to lay on them that concur not in opionion and
sentence with you. But our hope is, that the God of peace shall (notwithstanding
man's nature too impatient of contumelious malediction) enable us quietly, and
even gladly to suffer all things, for that work sake which we covet to perform.

The wonderful zeal and fervour which ye have withstood the received order of
this church, was the first thing which caused me to enter into consideration,
whether (as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain) every
Christian man, fearing God, stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of
that which ye term the Lord's Discipline. Wherein I must plainly confess unto
you, that before I examined your sundry declarations in that behalf, it could
not settle in my head to think but that undoubtedly such number of otherwise
right well affected and most religiously inclined minds had some marvellous
reasonable inducement which led them with so great earnestness that way. But
when once, as near as my slender ability would serve, I have performed with
travail and care performed that part of the Apostle's advice and counsel in such
cases, whereby he willeth to "try all things", and was come at the length so
far, that there remained only the other clause to be satisfied, wherein he
concludeth "what good is, must be held", there was in my poor understanding no
remedy, but to set down this as my final resolute persuasion: Surely the present
form of Church-government which the laws of this land have established, is such,
as no law of God, no reason of man hath hitherto been alleged of force
sufficient to prove they do ill, who to the uttermost of their power withstand
the alteration thereof. Contrariwise, the other, which we are required to
accept, is only by error and misconceit named the ordinance of Jesus Christ, no
one proof as yet brought forth, whereby it may clearly appear to be so in very
deed.

The explication of which two things I have here thought good to offer into your
own hands, heartily beseeching you even by the meekness of Jesus Christ, whom I
trust ye love, that, as ye tender the peace and quietness of this Church, if
there be in you that gracious humility which hath ever been the crown and glory
of a Christianly-disposed mind, if your own souls, hearts, and consciences (the
sound integrity whereof can but hardly stand with the refusal of truth in
personal respects) be, as I doubt not but they are, things most dear and
precious unto you, let "not the faith which ye have be blemished" by
"partialities", regard not who it is which speaketh, but weigh only what is
spoken. Think not that ye read the words of one who bendeth himself as an
adversary against the truth which ye have already embraced, but the words of one
who desireth to embrace together with you the selfsame truth, if it be the
truth. And for that cause (for no other, God himself know,) hath undertaken the
burthensome labour of this painful kind of conference. For the plainer access
whereunto, let it be lawful for me to rip up the very bottom, how and by whom
your discipline was planted, at such time as this age we live in began to take
first trial thereof.

A founder it had, whom for mine own part, I think incomparably the wisest man
that ever the French church did enjoy, since the hour it enjoyed him. His
bringing up was in the study of the civil law. Divine knowledge he gathered, not
by hearing and reading so much, as by teaching others. For though thousands were
debtors to him, as touching knowledge of that kind, yet he to none but only to
God, the author of that most blessed fountain, the Book of Life, and of the
admirable dexerity of wit, together with the helps of other learning which were
his guides: till being occasioned to leave France, he fell at the length upon
Geneva, which city the bishop and clergy had a little before (as some do affirm)
forsaken, being of likelihood frightened with the people's sudden attempt for
abolishment of popish religion, the event of which enterprise they thought it
not safe for themselves to wait for in that place. At the coming of Calvin
thither, the form of their civil regiment was popular, as it continueth at this
day, neither king, nor duke, nor nobleman of any authority and power over them,
but officers chosen by the people yearly out of themselves, to order all things
with public consent. For spiritual government, they had no laws at all agreed
upon, but did what the pastors of their souls by persuasion could win them unto.
Calvin, being admitted one of their preachers and a divinity reader amongst
them, considered how dangerous it was that the whole estate of that church
should hang still on so slender a thread as the liking of an ignorant multitude
is, if it have the power to change whatsoever itself listeth. Wherefore taking
unto him two of the ministers for more countenance (albeit the rest were all
against it) they moved, and in the end persuaded with much ado, the people to
bind in solemn oath, first never to admit the papacy amongst them again, and
secondly, to live in obedience unto such orders concerning the exercise of their
religion, and the form of their ecclesiastical government, as those their true
and faithful ministers of God's word had agreeably to scripture set down for
that end and purpose.

When these things began to be put in ure, the people also (what causes moving
them thereunto, themselves best know) began to repent them of that they had
done, and irefully to champ unto the bit they had taken into their mouths; the
rather, for that they grew by means of this innovation into dislike of some
churches near about them, the benefit of whose good friendship they could not
well lack.


===========================================================================
=============  Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France   ===========
===========================================================================
You are pleased to call again, and with some earnestness, for my thoughts on 
the late proceedings in France. I will not give you reason to imagine that I
think my sentiments of such value as to wish myself to be solicited about them.
They are of too little consequence to be very anxiously either communicated or
withheld. It was from attention to you, and to you only, that I hesitated at the
time when you first desired to receive them. In the first letter I had the honor
to write to you, and which at length I sent, I wrote neither for nor from any
description of men; nor shall I in this. My errors, if any, are my own. My
reputation alone is to answer them.

My paraphrase: first try

You were pleased to call again, for my thoughts on the latest proceedings in
France. I do not believe my sentiments are of such importance. They were of
little importance to be either communicated or withheld. It is to you, and to
you only that I will give out my opinions. 
[something about the last letter?]
The errors, if any, were my own, and my reputation was the only thing to suffer.

second try:
You are pleased to call, and with some earnestness, for my thoughts on the late
proceedings in France. I don't think my sentiments to be so important to be
solicited when I received your first letter. They are of little importance to 
be either communicated or withheld. It is for you, and for you only that I wrote
my first reply, and at length sent to you. My errors, if any, are my own, and my
reputation is the only thing to suffer.

Again Burke's version:
You are pleased to call again, and with some earnestness, for my thoughts on the
late proceedings in France. I will not give you reason to imagine that I think
my sentiments of such value as to be solicited about them. They are of too
little consequence to be very anxiously either communicated or withheld. It was
from attention to you, and to you only, that I hesitated at the time when you
first desired to receive them. In this first letter I had the honor to write to
you, and which at length I send, I wrote neither for nor from any description of
men; nor shall I in this. My errors, if any, are my own. My reputation alone is
to answer for them.

main ideas:
(1) Burke is answering for the second time.
(2) Burke wrote the first letter for the recipient only.
(3) Burke emphasizes this letter expresses only his own opionions.

Third try:
You are pleased to call again, and with some earnestness, for my thoughts on
the late proceedings in France. I don't want to let you imagine(?) that I 
think they are of much value to be solicited. They are of little
consequence to be actively either communicated or withheld. It is for you, and
for you only that I hesitated when you first desired them. 
The first letter I had the honor to write, and which at length I send, was not 
for or from the information of men. Neither will I in this. My errors, if any, 
are my own, my reputation solely answer for them.

give the reason to imagine
think ... of such value as to ...
on vs. about

Fourth try:
You are pleased to call again, and with some earnestness, for my thoughts on the
late proceedings in France. I will not give you reason to think that my
sentiments are of such value as to wish myself solicited about them. They are of
too little consequence to be very anxiously either communicated or withheld. It
is from attention to you, and to you only, that I hesitated at the time, when
you first desired to receive them. In the first letter I had the honor to write 
to you, and which at length I send, I wrote neither for nor from the description 
of men; Nor shall I in this. My errors, if any, are my own. My reputation alone 
is to answer for them.

L3: sentiments of such value as to wish myself to be solicited about them
L5: It was from attention to you

Fifth try:
You are pleased to call again, and with some earnestness, for my thoughts on the
late proceedings in France. I will not give you reason to think that my
sentiments are of such value as to wish myself to be solicited about them. They
are of too little consequence to be very anxiously either communicated or
withheld. It was from attention to you, and to you only, that I hesitated at the
time, when you first desired to receive them. In the first letter that I had the
honor to write to you, and which at length I send, I wrote neither for nor from
the description of men; nor shall I in this. My errors, if any, are my own. My
reputation alone is to suffer for them.

L-1: is to answer for them

====================================================================
==  Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France, 2nd paragraph
====================================================================
Burke's text:
You see, Sir, by the long letter I have transmitted to you, that, though I do
most heartily wish that France may be animated by a spirit of rational liberty,
and that I think you bound, in all honest policy, to provide a permanent body in
which that spirit may reside, and an effectual organ by which it may act, it is
my misfotune to entertain great doubts concerning several material points in
your late transactions.

Pre'cis:
Burke has doubts on several material points.
Burke wishes France to have (1) a rational liberty (2) a permanent body for (1)
to reside, and (3) an effectual organ for (1) to act.

Burke's text again:
You see, Sir, by the long letter I have transmitted to you, that, though I do
most heartily wish the France may be animated by a spirit of rational liberty,
and that I think you bound, in all honest policy, to provide a permanent body in
which that spirit may reside, and an effectual organ by which it may act, it is
my misfortune to entertain great doubts concerning several material points in
your late transactions.

My first attempt:
Sir, although I would congratulate the people in France for enjoying a spirit 
of rational liberty, there should also be a spot for it to reside, and an organ
for it to act, it is my great misfortune to entertain several material points
against your transactions.


















































































